---
layout: post
cover: '/assets/images/URIimages/urihead.jpg'
caption: 'The Odeum of Domitian, scale model. Public Domain.'
captionLink: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Domitianus#/media/File:Campus_Martius_-_Odeum_of_Domitian.jpg
title: 'Domitian -- Our Lord, God and Master Builder'
date: 2019-11-04 07:00:00
tags:
 - rome
 - architecture
 - Domitian
 - Emperor
category:
 - post
author: uri
---


Domitian was the Roman emperor from 81 to 96AD. He was the third and
last of the Flavian emperors after his father Vespasian and his brother
Titus. Domitian was ultimately assassinated in 96AD by a member of the
imperial staff ([Suet. Dom.
17](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0132%3Alife%3Ddom.%3Achapter%3D17)).
After his death, Domitian was given *damnatio memoriae*, meaning his
memory was damned with his name being wiped from the public record and
his statues smashed or reworked ([Suet. Dom.
23](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0132%3Alife%3Ddom.%3Achapter%3D23)).
Figure 1 shows an inscription in which Domitian's name was erased after
his *damnatio memoriae.*

**But why was Domitian treated like this?**

Domitian was not the most popular emperor among the Senatorial class.
The reason for this was because he had essentially made the
Senators' powers obsolete by dispelling with the Republican façade
and instead choosing to rule as a despot, coupled with the enforcement
of his financial policy and his increasing arrogance that lead to his
death (Jones, 1992).

There is no doubt that Domitian was a ruthless ruler but by no means was
he a bad one. In fact, Domitian was a very competent ruler that
undertook major economic, military, cultural and building programs in
the hope of resorting Rome to its golden age under Augustus. Suetonius
even states that during Domitian's reign the imperial bureaucracy had
never ran more efficiently due to the low levels of corruption of city
officials and governors of the provinces ([Suet. Dom.
8](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0132%3Alife%3Ddom.%3Achapter%3D8)).

Understanding the impact that Domitian had on Rome is not an easy job to
do due to his *damnatio memoriae*. The easiest way that we can see
Domitian's impact is in how he helped to develop the city of Rome
through his extensive building programs.

**Domitian's building program**

Whilst all of the Roman emperors undertook some form of building
program, not all of them changed the physical landscape of the city.
Augustus, Nero, Trajan, Hadrian and Septimius Severus were all emperors
who changed the physical landscape of Rome through the sheer size and
scope of their building projects. Domitian deserves a place among these
names as stated by Anderson (1983) that his reputation as a builder was
so great that the damning of his memory could not cover up his role in a
huge number of many projects.

Examining deeper at some of the buildings Domitian built shows us a
different figure to what has been told to us by the ancient sources. In
order to do this, buildings will be split into temples, public buildings
and the palace complex on the Palatine Hill.

**Temples**

The bulk of Domitian's building program was made up of temples, shrines
and monuments to the gods. Domitian built temples to Jupiter, Juno,
Minerva, Hercules, Phoebus, Castor and Pollux, Fortuna Redux, Isis and
Serapis, the *gens Flauia* and lastly Vespasian and Titus with many more
potentially having been lost to time (Darwall-Smith, 1996).

Each of the temples Domitian built had a special connection to him. The
temple of Jupiter Custos memorialised his escape in 69AD and the temple
of Fortuna Redux celebrated his military accomplishments, while his deep
admiration for Minerva is evidenced by the many temples dedicated to her
and the in the Forum which highlights her as a key figure
(Darwall-Smith, 1996).

Domitian's biggest and most decorative temple was to Jupiter Optimus
Maximus on the Capitoline Hill. He rebuilt this temple after the
devastating fire of 80AD which burnt down large areas of Rome in
particular the Campus Maritus and the Capitoline Hill ([Dio Cass.
66.24](http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/66*.html)).
Domitian's rebuild of this temple was so extravagant that Plutarch
states it cost more then 12,000 talents and that one look at the new
temple would cause people to think that Domitian's obsession with
building would only be satisfied when everything had been turned to gold
and stone. ([Plut, Publ.
15.3-5](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A2008.01.0059%3Achapter%3D15%3Asection%3D3)).
You can get a sense of the size of this temple by looking at its
foundation in Figure 2, though these foundations do date to an earlier
build of the temple.

**Public buildings**

The most famous of all the buildings constructed by the Flavian emperors
was that of the Colosseum. Construction of this monumental structure
began under Vespasian in 72AD and completed under Titus in 80AD.
Domitian made further modifications to the structure by adding
underground tunnels to house animals and slaves as well as a gallery in
the top in order to increase the seating capacity (Darwall-Smith, 1996).
Figure 3 shows a coin minted under Domitian depicting the Colosseum.

Due to the fire of 80AD, many buildings in the Campus Martius were in
need of restoration and Domitian restored many of them including the
Pantheon, Saepta Julia, Baths of Agrippa, Stage of Pompey's Theatre,
Diribitorium and the Theatre of Balbus (Robathan, 1942).

The fire of 80AD also destroyed large areas of the Campus Martius
itself. Instead of rebuilding or restoring the structures that were
there before, Domitian decided to build two new ones of his own. The
first of these was a new stadium, the first permanent one of its kind in
Rome, which was located on the site currently occupied by the Piazza
Navona. The second structure built in the Campus Martius was an Odeon.
It is suggested that this building was a small theatre, but this cannot
be completely confirmed (Darwall-Smith, 1996; [Suet. Dom.
5](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0132%3Alife%3Ddom.%3Achapter%3D5)).
Figure 4 shows the location of these two structures in the Campus
Martius.

Domitian's last gift to the public of Rome was an imperial forum know as
the Forum Transitorium, or more commonly, the Forum Nervae, located in
the Imperial Fora of Rome between the Forum of Augustus and the Temple
of Peace. Though it bears the name of Domitian's successor this
structure was almost entirely built by Domitian ([Suet. Dom.
5](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0132%3Alife%3Ddom.%3Achapter%3D5))
evidenced in part by the dominating feature of this Forum being a temple
to Domitian's patron goddess, Minerva (Robathan, 1942). Figure 5 shows
the position of the Forum Transitorium among the other Imperial Fora.

[Domitian's Palace complex]{.underline}

No emperor left a bigger stamp on the Palatine Hill than Domitian did
with the building of his palace complex. Domitian radically transformed
the topography of the Palatine so thoroughly and magnificently that it
was never significantly altered again for the rest of antiquity
(Darwall-Smith, 1996).

The palace complex of Domitian covered the entire south-eastern part of
the Palatine Hill. The complex is generally split into three sections
known from west to east, as the Domus Flavia, the Domus Augustana and
the Stadium. Corelli (Coarelli, 2014) argues that the entire complex
went by the single name in antiquity, the Domus Augustana or the
Palatium. A reconstruction of the palace complex can be seen in Figure
6.

Each of these three sections had a different function but all of them
acted together as one complex to satisfy all aspects of the emperor's
life. The Domus Flavia was the official public section of the palace and
it was in the large rooms and halls of this structure that the emperor
would conduct the political and administrative decisions of the Empire
(Darwall-Smith, 1996) whereas the Domus Augustana was thought to be the
private section of the palace complex. However, the distinction between
Domus Flavia being for public use and Domus Augustana, private is not an
entirely truthful one, as the rooms that lie between the two structures
do not create a distinct divide. It has been suggested that only the
southern area of the Domus Augustana, in the direction of the Circus
Maximus, was reserved for the private residence of the emperor. Evidence
for this theory is in the southern part of the building having a
physical divide to the rest of the structure and also allegedly having
been constructed at a later time (Coarelli, 2014). The last section of
the palace complex known as the Stadium can be seen in Figure 7. Though
it has been given the name of the 'Stadium' it is much more likely that
this structure was in actual fact a garden and a riding school
(Coarelli, 2014) as opposed to modern understandings of the term.

The ancient sources are full of praise for Domitian's palace complex
with Martial writing that it puts the pyramids of Egypt and Babylon to
shame and that the roof is so high it receives the first light of day
before even the goddess Circe (Mart. 8.36). Statius compares the
experience of dining in Domitian's palace to reclining alongside Jupiter
in the heavens (Stat. *Silv.* 4.2.10--11).

[Domitian's legacy]{.underline}

Whilst Domitian's legacy will never be free of his *damnatio memoriae*
and the reputation given to him in the ancient sources, the buildings he
left behind will always show us a different side of his character.

No building quite sums up Domitian's legacy like that of the Palace of
Domitian. Before Domitian the principiate had no clear definition and
this can be seen in the fact that no single organized structure had been
built that could bring together all the functions overseen by the
Imperial government. Domitian changed this when he decided to get rid of
Republican façade and make power formally monarchical. This shift caused
by Domitian is best seen in the separation between the private residence
and the public quarters of the palace complex which fulfilled the need
of the *emperor* to present himself to the public in a special, solemn
light (Coarelli, 2014).

Images

{% include lightbox.html
caption="Figure 1: Inscription found in Phillipi, Greece. The name of the Emperor Domitian is erased after his damnatio memeoriae. Inscription reads 'To the Emperor Vespasian Augustus, father of the country, to Titus Caesar (to Domitian -- erased) Caesar, sons of the Augustus out of public expenses'. License: CC BY-SA 3.0"
imageCredit="Author Unknown"
imageCreditLink="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Damnatio_memoriae_-_Domitian.jpg"
image="URIimages/urifig1.jpg"
width="800"
height="553" %}


{% include lightbox.html
caption=" Figure 2: Foundations of the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus. Public Domain."
imageCredit="Photo by Joris"
imageCreditLink="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Temple_Jupiter_Optimus_Maximus.JPG"
image="URIimages/urifig2.jpg"
width="450"
height="600" %}


{% include lightbox.html
caption=" Figure 3: Obverse of a Sestertius minted under Domitian depicting the Colosseum, RIC II (1) 131, American Numismatic Society. Open Database License."
imageCredit="Author Unknown"
imageCreditLink="http://numismatics.org/collection/1954.203.170"
image="URIimages/urifig3.jpg"
width="205"
height="205" %}


{% include lightbox.html
caption=" Figure 4: Map of Rome. 1.Stadium of Domitian; 2. Odeum of Domitian; 3. Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus; 4. Forum Transitorium (Forum Nervae); 5. Colosseum; 6. Palace of Domitian. Public Domain."
imageCredit="Map by ColdEel"
imageCreditLink="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Plan_Rome-_Regiones.png"
image="URIimages/urifig4.png"
width="682"
height="544" %}


{% include lightbox.html
caption=" Figure 5: Map showing the location of the Forum Transitorium (Forum Nervae)
 Public Domain."
imageCredit="Photo by Joris"
imageCreditLink="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Temple_Jupiter_Optimus_Maximus.JPG"
image="URIimages/urifig5.jpg"
width="800"
height="565" %}


{% include lightbox.html
caption=" Figure 6: Domitian's Palace Licence: CC BY-SA 3.0"
imageCredit="Author Unknown"
imageCreditLink="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Palatin-legende.jpg"
image="URIimages/urifig6.jpg"
width="800"
height="348" %}


{% include lightbox.html
caption="Figure 7: 'Stadium' on the Palatine Licence: CC BY 2.0"
imageCredit="Author Unknown"
imageCreditLink="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Palatine_stadium_of_Domitian.jpg"
image="URIimages/urifig7.jpg"
width="800"
height="600" %}


Guide to Further Reading

Expedition - Domitian's Rule: [Youtube
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VGBljR26uY4) on Domitian
published by Penn Museum. This is a short video in which Dr. Brian Ross
gives a nice overview of Domitian and his reign.

Waters, K. H. 1964. *"The Character of Domitian"*, Phoenix, 18 (1),
49-77.]

[Zissos, A. 2016. *A Companion to the Flavian Age of Imperial Rome,
Chichester.*

Bibliography

Anderson, J. 1983. *A Topographical Tradition in Fourth Century
Chronicles: Domitian\'s Building Program*, *Historia*, 32(1), 93-105.

Coarelli, F. 2014. *Rome and Environs. An Archaeological
Guide,* Berkeley.

Darwall‐Smith, R. 1996. *Emperors and Architecture: A Study of
Flavian Rome*, Brussels.

Jones, B.W. 1992. *The Emperor Domitian*, London and New York.

Robathan, D.M. 1942. Domitian's Midas-Touch, *Transactions and
Proceedings of the American Philological Association*, 73, 130-144.
